# From Boomer-to-Zoomer using a Double Diamond Design

By Steven Pong and Giancarlo Biasiucci 

## Introduction 

Age is but a cruel companion that becomes crueler with time. She might seem like a sweet tempting mistress, but she won’t sugarcoat man’s biological reality, senescence1. According to the CATO Institute’s Human Progress project, the expected lifespan of humans would reach 92 in 2100 from the present expected lifespan of 82. Throughout the ages, the average expected lifespan was 30 years. In around 120 years, the expected lifespan nearly tripled. It also mentioned that the average expectancy grows on average 3 months per year. If life expectancy increases as humans are becoming more and more sedentary and have a growing obesity problem, then by implication, mental and physical health could be significant contributors. 

## Research and Analysis

### Understand

#### Discover - discovering insight into the problem

According to a 2018 World Health Organization (WHO) report on human lifespan, the average Canadian can expect an extra decade in their lifespan to  82.8 years compared to their counterparts of the 1960s. An inequitable but correctable problem space arises in elderly populations not present in non-elderly populations due to a technological divide between generations which results in an uneven distribution of potential lifespan gains.

In addition, elderly populations may not be able to make use of the same resources and tools for health improvement & management (when it comes to their physical health as well as their mental health) as younger individuals. Depending on the elderly individual in particular, the causes for this reduced usability of health tools & resources can vary (such as reduced mobility, reduced mental capacity, reduced cognitive functioning, reduced energy levels and mentally inhibiting diseases like dementia). It is extremely important to ensure that the elderly, no matter what their circumstances of living and health may be, have access to easily usable and assuredly beneficial resources for improving and managing their health, whether physical or mental.

There exist studies which conclude that cognitively stimulating games such as Sudoku contribute to improved cognitive health among elderly individuals (those aged 65 and older) [GB-3]. One such study that has been documented by Ferreira et al. concluded that games such as Sudoku tended to result in improvements in elderly people’s abilities to greatly understand verbally expressed concepts, mentally take in as well as remember information, and remember past experiences along with associated details or feelings to a great extent [GB-3]. Each of these improvements would be of objectively positive use to elderly individuals living at home or in retirement communities. Improved concept comprehension would make it easier for people such as family members, nurses or retirement home staff to effectively communicate with the elderly without many (if not any) misunderstandings or lack of understandability. Improvements to taking in and remembering information would facilitate the completion of everyday tasks and utilization of everyday items when it comes to the elderly since they would not have to spend as much (if not any) time searching for instructions/guidelines on task completion and item utilization. Improvements to greatly remembering past experiences would increase the likelihood of elderly individuals remembering people from their past who had been involved in such experiences, allow for them to periodically reflect on positive times of old while relaxing, and perhaps allow for them to complete tasks or use items involved in past experiences. 

The United States Department of Agriculture has published several health-related recommendations for individuals who are 60 years old or older [GB-4]. They should consume foods from each of the 5 food groups (fruits, vegetables, grain foods, protein foods and dairy products [GB-5], with the first two being recommended additions to snacks and complete meals [GB-4]) on a daily basis in order to lower their chances of being afflicted with diseases like high blood pressure and heart disease [GB-4]. They should avoid foods or drinks containing saturated fats, sodium and a high sugar content [GB-4]. They should prioritize the intake of beneficial nutrients such as potassium, calcium and vitamins D & B12 [GB-4]. They should drink water on a healthy and regular basis (with lactose-free, soy and juice beverages acting as additional verified means of hydration) [GB-4]. They should consume a sufficient amount of protein every day in order to maintain a healthy amount of muscle mass and help one’s body to better absorb vitamin B12 [GB-4]. When it comes to physical activity, they should aim for a minimum of 150 minutes of “moderate” (to a degree which causes one’s heart to undergo faster-than-usual beating) physical activity every week [GB-4].  

#### Define - defining the area(s) to focus on

A person’s lifespan is determined by their senescence (health span) which is the biology of aging. Age is but a number that is not a reliable determinant of lifespan due to the wide spectrum of factors that determine a person’s lifespan. The lifespan of an elderly, as defined by the United Nations as being 60 years of age or older, is constrained from their genetic and environmental surroundings. While genetic predispositions are out of anyone’s control, environmental conditions aren’t. Those environmental conditions influence the physical and mental wellbeing of individuals. While physical wellbeing is a given, mental wellbeing is only recently becoming more and more accepted as being an integral element of holistic whole health. There is where the problem space arises. One of the “great” multipliers of health is access and adoption to modern technology which unfortunately for the elderly boomers is deficient to later generations.

A person's physical health is determined by the overall condition of their body in conjunction with numerous factors such as how physically active they are, what their diet is like and what they are exposed to (in terms of surroundings, sunlight, harmful substances, etc.) on a regular basis [GB-1]. A person's mental health is determined by how well they handle stressful happenings and how emotionally well their manner of living is, both in conjunction with numerous factors such as the degree to which they are surrounded by objectively negative circumstances (such as violence and poverty), what their social & emotional circumstances are like, the degree to which they have the capacity to relieve themselves of stress, and how much harshly impactful negativity pertains to their past [GB-2].

### Explore

#### Develop - developing potential solutions

Zoomers (individuals born after 1996) are “genetically” predisposed to be intuitively “technology-savvy” compared to Boomers (individuals born before 1965) who remain in the era of Fred Flintstone sending messages hammered and chiseled on stones in terms of technology savviness. While advances in medicine may artificially extend a Boomer’s lifespan, it cannot extend their mental health. At issue is the trade-off of an artificially extension of life at the cost of remaining in a near vegetative state due to the lack of the astronomical mental stimulation Zoomers benefit from an era of information overload. 

One means of providing health improvement and management resources (for both one's physical and mental health) for elderly populations would be via the use of a specially tailored application featuring health-related tips (for both physical and mental health) and easily doable exercises. In addition, a means of cognitive stimulation should be included so as to make it possible for elderly populations to cognitively act in a manner akin to younger generations (essentially converting their manner of cognitively behaving from that of a complete "Boomer" to that of a "Zoomer"). However, it is important to guarantee that such an application will be easily able to be used by all elderly populations and actually provide great benefit to its target users.

#### Deliver - delivering solutions (in the case of this project, prototypes) that work

Zoomers, to an extent, may benefit from information overload from the perspective of stimulating the neurons which in turn stimulates mental health. While it unconceivable for a Boomer to immerse themselves into a Zoomer lifestyle, it can be posited that not all mental stimulation is created equally. A Zoomer mindlessly checking his social media feed every other second could be equated to a Boomer playing a challenging mind game for a few minutes. In essence, it’s not the quantity but the quality of neurons expended that could serve as the bridge to narrow that technological divide.




